# Health Workforce Data Schema
<b>A place to build a health workforce data schema for state health workforce analysts</b>

Intentions to publish schemas and code for standardization of queries and connection of data using open source tools such as:
<li>MySql</li>
<li>R</li>
<li>Amazon S3</li>
<li>Amazon Athena</li>
<li>Jupyter Notebooks</li>
<li>Python</li> 
</br>
<p>
Need for contributions into figuring out how to hash/deidentify datasets sufficiently to allow for circumvention of HIPPA, IRB
other data privacy concerns to allow for connection and query based on data governance access.

National health workforce planning is currently done through minimum number sample surveys collected on paper by national 
planning, policy, certification and licensing groups. (AAMC, NCSBN, HRSA, various other profession/education specific bodies). 

National health workforce planning done on the federal and state level is supported by data about consumer demand for 
health servcies, (insurance claims data- medicaid, medicare  and private companies), population growth trends and workforce 
data on supply, education and employment demand. Not all of this data exists in every state. Nor is access to /awareness of the 
data by the right people in place in all states. Data quality and collection vries across states. The theoretical standards 
exists. The information systems are beng organized in each state.

Health workforce planning requires considerations by a network of leaders in industry, government and education. 
Creating data informed health workforce policy/planning requires a cultural shift from silo-ed entities focused on 
specific professions, specialties and responsibilities to collaborative entities focusing on improvement and optimization. 

Much of the data generated by government exists in Systems of Record. These systems exist to support business and focus on 
efficient processing of transactions. Public policy work exists within Systems of Engagement-  personalized and highly 
responsive support to specific stakeholder interests. These systems are built for targeted research surveys, 
profession, industry and education advocacy, and public and private grants and contracts work. 
Between these two systems are Systems of Insight. These consolidate data from systems of record and systems of engagement 
to support analytics. These systems support both the creating of analytics and the execution of analytics. 

The harmonized data from all of these systems has the potential to be analyzed from different perspectives to add value, 
create improved understanding and new insights. 

Data sets that can be used to do health workforce analysis exist in some form in every state in the country. 
Quality and organization of the data vary from state to state. If state level entities understand what potentially esists 
in thier state they can look for ways to develop relationsships to access the required data or advocate for development of
collection systems. 

Without published standards for how to structure, connect and interact with these existing datasets, health workforce analysis 
is a burdensome, expensive and lengthy process that is becoming less and less able to respond to the emerging issues that each
state in our country faces. These common issues include growing and aging populations living longer with chronic disease,
problems with addiction, suicide, violence and trauma and increasing socioeconomic inequalities. </p>

<ul><b>Requirement for a Needs-Based Analytical Framework</b>
<li>Segal and Leach</li>
<li>Birch
Birch, S et al. 
#Health Human Resources Planning and the Production of Health: Development of an Extended Analytical Framework 
for Needs-Based Health Human Resources Planning.  J Public Health Manag Pract. 2009 Nov;15(6 Suppl):S56-61. 
doi: 10.1097/PHH.0b013e3181b1ec0e.</li>
<li>HRSA cited papers</li>
<li>GEMNAC Equation</li></ul>

<ul><b>Existing Data</b>
<li>BRFSS</li>
<li>IBIS</li>
<li>APCD</li>
<li>Licensing/Supply</li>
<li>Unemployment</li>
<li>P20w</li>
<li>Tax</li>
<li>DL</li></ul>

<ul><b>Existing Standards</b>
<li>Forum MDS</li>
<li>Survey Instruments</li>
<li>Codebooks</li>
<li>Crosswalks</li>
<li>Defined Queries</li>
<li>UMEC DW schema</li>
<li>UMEC developed codebooks</li></ul>

